NGF: Add user guides for gatewayLink feature (#2187)
nginx/documentation: content/ngf/external-loadbalancers/gatewayLink/quickstart.md

---
title: Use F5 BIG-IP as an external load balancer
description: Configure an ExternalLoadBalancer so F5 BIG-IP acts as the external load balancer for an NGINX Gateway Fabric Gateway in a single cluster, preserving client IP addresses with the PROXY protocol.
weight: 100
toc: true
f5-content-type: how-to
f5-product: FABRIC
f5-docs: DOCS-0000
f5-audience: operator
f5-keywords: BIG-IP, F5 CIS, Container Ingress Services, IngressLink, AS3, ExternalLoadBalancer, GatewayLink, IPAM, PROXY protocol, rewriteClientIP, iRule
f5-summary: Use an ExternalLoadBalancer custom resource to place an F5 BIG-IP virtual server in front of an NGINX Gateway Fabric Gateway in a single cluster. The F5 IPAM Controller allocates the virtual server address, and an iRule adds a PROXY protocol header so NGINX sees the original client address.
---

This guide describes how to use an F5 BIG-IP system as the external load balancer for an NGINX Gateway Fabric Gateway.

## Overview

> GatewayLink integrates NGINX Gateway Fabric with F5 BIG-IP Container Ingress Services to configure an F5 BIG-IP system as the external load balancer for a Gateway. You describe the desired BIG-IP configuration through the `ExternalLoadBalance`r` custom resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GatewayLink integrates NGINX Gateway Fabric with F5 BIG-IP Container Ingress Services to configure an F5 BIG-IP system as the external load balancer for a Gateway. You describe the desired BIG-IP configuration through the `ExternalLoadBalancer` custom resource.
```

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    A[ExternalLoadBalancer<br/>NGINX Gateway Fabric] --> B[IngressLink<br/>F5 Container Ingress Services]
    B --> C[AS3 declaration<br/>POST to BIG-IP]
    C --> D[BIG-IP<br/>virtual server, pool]
```

## Before you begin

You need:

- A Kubernetes cluster.
- An F5 BIG-IP system running version {{< version-bigip >}} or later, and an account on it with administrator privileges.
- Network access from the cluster to the BIG-IP system, and from BIG-IP to the cluster node addresses.

This guide installs the AS3 extension, the F5 IPAM Controller, F5 Container Ingress Services, and NGINX Gateway Fabric.

Replace these placeholders wherever they appear in this guide:

- `<BIGIP_ADDRESS>` is the BIG-IP management address including the port, for example `192.0.2.10:8443`.
- `<BIGIP_USERNAME>` and `<BIGIP_PASSWORD>` are your BIG-IP credentials.
- `<ALLOCATED_ADDRESS>` is the virtual server address allocated by the F5 IPAM Controller.
- `<IPAM_ADDRESS_RANGE>` is a free address range on the BIG-IP subnet, for example `192.0.2.100-192.0.2.110`.

> - `<POD_NETWORK_CIDR>` is the cluster Pod network CIDR, for example `<POD_NETWORK_CIDR>`.

Reviewer: The example here is just the variable name.

```

Deploy F5 Container Ingress Services:

```shell
helm repo add f5-stable https://f5networks.github.io/charts/stable
helm repo update

helm install f5-cis f5-stable/f5-bigip-ctlr -n kube-system \
  --set bigip_secret.create=true \
  --set bigip_secret.username="<BIGIP_USERNAME>" \
  --set bigip_secret.password="<BIGIP_PASSWORD>" \
  --set rbac.create=true \
  --set serviceAccount.create=true \
  --set namespace=kube-system \
  --set args.bigip_url="<BIGIP_ADDRESS>" \
  --set args.bigip_partition=k8s \
  --set args.pool_member_type=nodeport \
  --set args.custom_resource_mode=true \
  --set args.insecure=true \
  --set args.log_level=DEBUG \
  --set args.log-as3-response=true \
  --set args.ipam=true
```

These fields must be set according to your own setup:

- `args.bigip_url` must include the port. F5 Container Ingress Services assumes 443, so omitting a non-default port causes connection failures.
- `args.custom_resource_mode=true` is required. Without it, F5 Container Ingress Services never watches `IngressLink` resources.

> - `args.pool_member_type` must match the `NginxProxy` Service type. Use `nodeport` with `NodePort`, or `cluster` with `ClusterIP`.

Reviewer: `NginxProxy` Service type is a little confusing, maybe Gateway Service type is better.

          path: /nginx-ready
EOF
```

This `NginxProxy` configures the Gateway that references it with the settings BIG-IP depends on:

- `rewriteClientIP.mode: ProxyProtocol` reads the client address from the PROXY protocol header the iRule adds.
- `service.type` must match the F5 Container Ingress Services `pool_member_type`.
- `readinessProbe.expose` puts the readiness port on the Service, and `readinessProbe.path` sets the path the generated health monitor requests. NGINX Gateway Fabric serves its readiness endpoint at `/readyz` by default, while the monitor generated by F5 Container Ingress Services requests `/nginx-ready`, so setting the path here makes the two agree.
- `rewriteClientIP.trustedAddresses` lists the sources NGINX accepts that header from. Set it to the cluster Pod network CIDR. NGINX applies the header only when the peer address is trusted, and with `pool_member_type=nodeport` kube-proxy forwards the connection, so NGINX sees the node's Pod network address as the peer rather than the BIG-IP address.

Find the Pod network CIDR:

```shell
kubectl get nodes -o jsonpath='{.items[*].spec.podCIDRs}'
```

```text
["<POD_NETWORK_CIDR>","2001:cafe:42::/64"]

> ```

Reviewer: This should be done before a user creates the NginxProxy above.
